See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342916764
HOW TO WRITE AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH PAPER
Article · April 2019
CITATIONS
19
READS
173,211
3 authors:
Siva Prathap
Yogi Vemana University
31 PUBLICATIONS   185 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Mohd Akhter Ali
Osmania University
93 PUBLICATIONS   666 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
M. Kamraju
Osmania University
118 PUBLICATIONS   901 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by M. Kamraju on 20 July 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
488 
 
HOW TO WRITE AN ACADEMIC RESEARCH 
PAPER 
*Dr T. Siva Prathap,Dr Mohd Akhter Ali, M.Kamraju 
Assistant Professor, Research Scholar 
* Department of Earth Sciences Department of Geography 
*Yogi Vemana University, Osmania University, Centre for Economic and Social Studies 
Hyderabad, Telangana 
 
Abstract 
Research papers are highly recognized in scholar fraternity. In addition to that the published research 
work provides a big weight-age to career growth and helps to get admission in reputed universities. 
Research Scholars doing Ph.D it has become mandatory to publish their research papers at international 
level academic Journals or scholarly (Peer Reviewed) journals. And many of the students who wish to 
apply for further studies in technical courses will discover that relevant published research papers help 
during admission process.So, in this paper we will highlight and enlist the proven steps to write the 
research paper for peer-reviewed journals. 
Keywords: Research, fraternity, published, universities, international, Peer Reviewed 
 
INTRODUCTION 
What is a research paper?  
"Research paper." What image comes into mind as you hear those words: working with stacks of articles 
and books, hunting the "treasure" of others' thoughts? Whatever image you create, it's a sure bet that you're 
envisioning sources of information--articles, books, people, and artworks. Yet a research paper is more 
than the sum of your sources, more than a collection of different pieces of information about a topic, and 
more than a review of the literature in a field.  
A research paper is piece of academic writing based on its author’s original research work on a particular 
topic and the analysis and interpretation of research findings. 
In other words, a research paper is an expanded essay that presents your own interpretation or evaluation or 
argument. When you write an essay, you use everything that you personally know and have thought about 
a subject. When you write a research paper you build upon what you know about the subject and make a 
deliberate attempt to find out what experts know. A research paper involves surveying a field of knowledge 
in order to find the best possible information in that field. And that survey can be orderly and focused, if 
you know how to approach it. Don't worry--you won't get lost in a sea of sources. 
To achieve supreme excellence in anything we do, we need more than just the knowledge. Like a cricket 
player aiming for world cup, we must have a positive attitude and believe that we have the ability to 
achieve it. That will be the real start for writing A1 research paper. 
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
489 
 
How to start a research paper? 
Choose a topic which interests and challenges you. Your attitude towards the topic will well determine the 
amount of effort and enthusiasm you put into research. Focus on limited aspect, example: narrow down 
from “biodiversity” to “biodiversity in Telangana”.If possible obtain the approval of faculty for the topic 
before concentrating on full scale research. 
The most important thing is select a subject that you can manage. Avoid subjects that are very technical, 
learned or specialized. Avoid the subjects which have limited excess to data. Do not go for controversial 
topic, Example: religious encroachment, political parties’ corruption.etc 
Steps to write a Research Paper 
If you are writing research paper for the first time, it may seem frightening, but with good organization and 
focus of mind, you can make the process easier on yourself. Writing a research paper broadly it involves 
four main stages: choosing a topic, researching your topic, making an outline, and doing the actual writing. 
The paper won't write itself, but by planning and preparing well, the writing practically falls into place. 
Essentially a narrower research paper consists of Ten major sections. The number of pages may vary 
depending upon the topic of research work but generally comprises up to 8 to 10 pages. These are: 
1. Abstract 
2. Introduction 
3. Review of Literature 
4. Objectives 
5. Methodology and database used 
6. Research Analysis or Research Discussion 
7. Results or Finding 
8. Recommendations/suggestions  
9. Conclusions 
10. References/Citations  
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
490 
 
FIGURE SHOWING RESEARCH PAPER WRITING FLOWCHART 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                    
 
 
1. Abstract: An abstract is a brief summary of a research article, thesis, review, conference 
proceeding or any in-depth analysis of a particular subject or discipline, and is often used to help 
the reader quickly ascertain the paper's purpose. When used, an abstract always appears at the 
INTRODUCTION 
What?     Why?   
How? 
LITERATURE 
REVIEW 
Why?   How? 
METHODLOGY 
How? 
Preliminary Data 
Analysis 
What? 
Statement of 
Limitations 
Suggestions & 
Conclusions 
What?     Why?   
How? 
Summary of Research 
Literature on topic 
Literature on Method 
Theoritical Approach 
Look for Debates and discussions 
Literature Gaps 
Kind of data 
Collection Procedure 
Cost and Funding 
Ethics and Statements 
Research paper design 
Preliminary findings  
Categorization of data 
Analysis of data 
What your research 
paper will do 
Alternatives and 
Weaknesses 
Contributions 
Recommendations 
Importance for society 
About the Topic 
References / 
Citations 
APA 
ASA 
Chicago Manual 
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
491 
 
beginning of a manuscript, acting as the point-of-entry for any given scientific paper or patent 
application. By reading the abstract the reader gets some idea about the research paper. 
2. Introduction: It's the foremost preliminary step for proceeding with any research work writing. In 
this section details about the topics are elaborated. In this section the reason for choosing this topic 
is also mentioned. While doing this go through a complete thought process of your Journal subject 
and research for its viability by following means:  
® Read already published work in the same field. 
® Goggling on the topic of your research work.  
® Attend conferences, workshops and symposiums on the same fields or on related 
counterparts.  
® Understand the scientific terms and jargon related to your research work.  
 For Example: If the topic of research paper is “Urban Sprawl and Sustainable Development in 
Hyderabad: A Geoinformatic Approach” then in the introduction section we will write about 
Urban sprawl and sustainable development a general view. 
3. Study area: it is one of the vital component in research as taking study area makes a research 
narrower. In this section details about the study area is written like, location (coordinates), geology 
(soil, terrain, relief), Climate, etc and most importantly map of the study area. 
4. Objectives: This deals with why we are writing this research journal. 
For Example:   
 To study the change detection in land use and land cover of Hyderabad 
 To study the socio-economic conditions of working women in Warangal. 
5. Methodology and Database used; In this section which method we are using for writing our 
research is written like Primary which is personally going to field or through questionnaire method 
or by secondary method which is from census,books,journals,newspapers,grey literature, Ph.D 
thesis,Internet,etc.  
For Example: If the topic of research paper is “Urban Sprawl and Sustainable Development in 
Hyderabad: A Geoinformatic Approach” then the methodology will be:- 
GIS techniques was applied to show the trends in economic, spatial, land use and land cover 
patterns and also impact of the city of Hyderabad on agricultural patterns, diversification of 
economic activities, increasing demand for value for land. Remote Sensing Satellite data (IRS 1C 
and 1D), will be processed through Image processing techniques using ERDAS Imagine software. 
6. Research Elaborations: Now it is the time to articulate the research work with ideas gathered in 
above steps by adopting any of below suitable approaches:  
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
492 
 
® Bits and Pieces together: In this approach combine all your researched information in form 
of a journal or research paper. In this researcher can take the reference of already 
accomplished work as a starting building block of its paper.  
® Jump Start: This approach works the best in guidance of fellow researchers. In this the 
authors continuously receives or asks inputs from their fellows. It enriches the information 
pool of your paper with expert comments or up gradations. And the researcher feels 
confident about their work and takes a jump to start the paper writing.  
® Use of Simulation software: There are numbers of software available which can mimic the 
process involved in your research work and can produce the possible result. you can get the 
simulated results of your paper and it easies the process of paper writing. Some of the 
processing Software are: ArcGIs,Qgis,ILWIS,Erdas,Mapillary,etc 
7. Suggestions and Recommendations: In this suggestions for future studies and recommendations 
can be given so that the problem is solved by any government or NGO. 
For Example: better transport facilities should be provided to the rural villages. 
8. Results or Finding: This section also has more details about your research in continuation with 
above section. In this section all the research matter will be summed up into points so that the 
reader can understand easily. 
9. Conclusions: This 
section 
will 
have 
conclusions 
about 
your 
research.  
As by adopting the above practices all major constructs of a research paper can be written and 
together compiled to form a complete research ready for Peer review. Most research papers 
conclude with a restated thesis statement. Present your thesis again, but reword it. Briefly 
summarize the points you’ve made. Take a moment to explain why you believe those points support 
your case. If your research is inconclusive, take a moment to point out why you believe this topic 
bears further research.  
10. References: This section will have all the citations which we have used in writing our research. 
The major citation types used in research paper are; 
 APA 
 ASA 
 CHICAGO MANUAL 
For Example:  
1. MLA: Kamraju, M, and Siva Prathaap. “HOW TO AVOID REJECTION OF RESEARCH PAPER 
BY JOURNALS.” International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR (2019): n. pag. 
Print. 
© 2019 JETIR April 2019, Volume 6, Issue 4                                                      www.jetir.org  (ISSN-2349-5162) 
JETIR1904574 
Journal of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research (JETIR) www.jetir.org 
493 
 
2. APA: Kamraju, M., & Prathaap, S. (2019). HOW TO AVOID REJECTION OF RESEARCH 
PAPER BY JOURNALS. International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR. 
3. CHICAGO: Kamraju, M, and Siva Prathaap. “HOW TO AVOID REJECTION OF RESEARCH 
PAPER BY JOURNALS.” International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR, 2019 
CONCLUSION: 
Although the academic research paper format is fairly standardized, writing guidelines may vary not 
only among academic institutions but also among individual professors. So, pay attention to any how-to 
handouts you’ve received, and don’t forget to check your university’s writing instructions for more 
resources. 
Through this paper we wanted to highlight the unknown facts which scholars face while writing 
academic research paper. We are not saying this is the only format but you can use this format as most 
of the reputed journals ask such format. 
REFERENCES: 
1. Kamraju, M, and Siva Prathaap. “HOW TO AVOID REJECTION OF RESEARCH PAPER BY 
JOURNALS.” International Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR, 2019 
2. Kamraju, M, and M. Kamraju. “Changing Pattern of Urban Growth in Hyderabad City: A 
Study.” Jai Maa Saraswati Gyanadayani 3, no. 3 (2018): 483–503. 
3. Kamraju, M, and Vani M. “M.KAMRAJU Et Al., SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONDITIONS OF 
FARMERS: A CASE STUDY OF WARANGAL DISTRICT.” KY Publications 5, no. 4 (2017): 
158–63. 
4. Kamraju, M, M. Kamraju, and Vani M. “Village Information System Using GIS: A Case Study 
of Chilkur Village, Moinabad Mandal Telangana.” Jai Maa Saraswati Gyandayani 3, no. 1 
(2017): 21–31. 
5. Kamraju, M. “IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY: A 
CASE STUDY OF NALGONDA DISTRICT TELANGANA.” International Journal of Research in 
Management & Social Science 5, no. 3 (2017): 70–76. 
6. Kombo, Donald Kisilu, and Delno LA Tromp. "Proposal and thesis writing: An 
introduction." Nairobi: Paulines Publications Africa 5 (2006): 814-30. 
7. Kothari, Chakravanti Rajagopalachari. Research methodology: Methods and techniques. New 
Age International, 2004. 
8. Kumar, Ranjit. Research methodology: A step-by-step guide for beginners. Sage Publications 
Limited, 2019. 
9. Mugenda, Olive M., and Abel G. Mugenda. Research methods: Quantitative and qualitative 
approaches. Acts press, 1999. 
View publication stats
